README.md, before:

# Arotake

**Arotake** is a Python toolkit for evaluating meteorological forecast models against observations. It currently offers a comparison of select NOAA HRRR contiguous United States surface forecast variables with NCEI ISD-Lite surface observations, stratified by U.S. Regional Transmission Organization (RTO) and Independent System Operator (ISO) regions.

## Installation (Linux / macOS)

```bash
wget -O environment.yml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jankazil/Arotake/main/environment.yml  
mamba env create -y -f environment.yml  
conda activate arotake
```

## Overview

The toolkit provides analysis scripts for working with NOAA ISD-Lite surface observations and NOAA HRRR contiguous United States surface forecasts, organized by U.S. Regional Transmission Organization (RTO) and Independent System Operator (ISO) regions:

- **Construct_ISDLite_data_netCDF_for_RTO_ISO_regions.py**  
  Downloads ISD-Lite station metadata, filters stations by location and data availability, assigns stations to RTO/ISO regions, generates a regional station map, downloads the observations (optionally in parallel), and saves region-specific NetCDF files with observations. This needs to be done only once for the given time range.

- **Analyze_HRRR_vs_ISDLite_time_series_by_RTO_ISO_region.py**  
  Loads region-specific ISD-Lite observation NetCDF files and HRRR forecast files, computes regional HRRR-only statistics and HRRR-vs-observation diagnostics, saves results as NetCDF time series, and generates plots of the statistics for each region.

The workflow is

1. Data preparation:
   - Download RTO/ISO regions in GEOJson format, only once
   - Download HRRR contiguous United States surface forecast data, only once for a given time range
2. Download and construct RTO/ISO region ISD-Lite Datasets, only once for a given time range
3. Calculate RTO/ISO region HRRR vs ISD-Lite Statistics Time Series

## Workflow

## 1. Data Preparation

- Download the definitions of the RTO/ISO regions in GEOJson format from https://atlas.eia.gov/datasets/rto-regions.

- Download the HRRR surface forecast data for the contiguous United States, a given time period, forecast initialization time, and forecast lead time, and convert them to netCDF files with the [HRRR-data](https://github.com/jankazil/hrrr-data) toolkit:
    - Use the script    [DownloadHRRRSurfaceForecast.py](https://github.com/jankazil/hrrr-data/blob/main/scripts/DownloadHRRRSurfaceForecast.py) to download HRRR surface forecast files in GRIB format for a given time range from the Amazon S3 HRRR bucket, which also extracts select variables into netCDF files into a directory tree as follows:

        hrrr.<YYYYMMDD\>/conus/hrrr.t<II\>z.wrfsfcf<FF\>_select_vars.nc

## 2. Construct RTO/ISO region ISD-Lite Datasets

```bash
Construct_ISDLite_data_netCDF_for_RTO_ISO_regions.py <start_year> <start_month> <start_day> <end_year> <end_month> <end_day> <geojson_file> <isdlite_data_dir> [-n <n_jobs>]
```

Example:

```bash
Construct_ISDLite_data_netCDF_for_RTO_ISO_regions.py 2021 1 1 2021 12 31 data/RTO_ISO_regions.geojson data/ISD-LITE/ -n 8
```

This will:  

- Load RTO/ISO region geometries.
- Download and filter ISD-Lite station metadata.  
- Assign stations to RTO/ISO regions and save station lists.  
- Download observations (parallelized if `-n` > 1).  
- Save region-specific NetCDF files with the observations.  
- Plot a map of the ISD stations in each region:  

![ISD stations reporting in 2021](docs/RTO_ISO_regions_2021_ISD_stations_map.png)

## 3. Calculate RTO/ISO region HRRR vs ISD-Lite Statistics Time Series

```bash
Analyze_HRRR_vs_ISDLite_time_series_by_RTO_ISO_region.py <start_year> <start_month> <start_day> <end_year> <end_month> <end_day> <forecast_init_hour> <forecast_lead_hour> <geojson_file> <isdlite_data_dir> <hrrr_data_dir> <out_dir>
```

<hrrr_data_dir\> is the parent directory of a data directory tree which contains the HRRR netCDF files as follows (see Section ''Data Preparation''):  

hrrr.<YYYYMMDD\>/conus/hrrr.t<II\>z.wrfsfcf<FF\>_select_vars.nc

Example:

```bash
Analyze_HRRR_vs_ISDLite_time_series_by_RTO_ISO_region.py 2021 1 1 2021 12 30 12 6 data/RTO_ISO_regions.geojson data/ISD-LITE/ data/HRRR/ results/
```

This will:  

- Load RTO/ISO region geometries and ISD-Lite observations.
- Load HRRR forecasts for the specified initialization/lead hours.
- Compute and save time series of HRRR regional statistics and of HRRR vs ISD-Lite observation statistics.
- Generate plots of the time series per region, e.g.:

![HRRR vs ISD Lite 2 m temperature bias at stations reporting in 2021](docs/2021-01-01-2021-12-31.model_vs_obs_bias_at_obs_locs.png)

## Public API

### Modules

- **`arotake.interpolation`**  
  Function:
  - `model_2D_interpolate`: Interpolates a 2-D model field to arbitrary lat/lon points using bilinear regridding with xESMF, with internal caching to improve performance.

- **`arotake.rto_iso`**  
  Functions:
  - `regions`: Loads all RTO/ISO regions from a GeoJSON file and returns a `GeoDataFrame`.
  - `region`: Loads a single RTO/ISO region by name and returns a `GeoDataFrame`.

- **`arotake.statistics`**  
  Classes:
  - `Model2DRegionalStatisticsTimeSeries`: Computes and accumulates regional statistics (mean, std, var) of a model variable over a polygonal region, exports results as DataFrames or Datasets.
  - `ModelVsObs2DStatisticsTimeSeries`: Computes model-vs-obs metrics (bias, RMSE, correlation, coverage) by interpolating model data to station locations and comparing with observations.

- **`arotake.plotting`**  
  Functions:
  - `plot_df_timeseries`: Plots one figure per statistic by overlaying multiple DataFrames and saves PNG files with consistent naming conventions.

## Development

### Code Quality and Testing Commands

- `make fmt` – Runs `ruff format` to auto-format Python files.
- `make lint` – Runs `ruff check --fix` to lint and autofix style issues.
- `make check` – Runs both formatting and linting.
- `make type` – Runs `mypy` type checker in strict mode.
- `make test` – Runs `pytest` with coverage reporting.

### Notes

Arotake uses [xESMF](https://xesmf.readthedocs.io]) (Universal Regridder for Geospatial Data), which uses [ESMPy](https://earthsystemmodeling.org/esmpy) (ESMF Python Regridding Interface) as backend. These packages are as of writing available as conda packages from conda-forge. This necessitates installing a conda environment to operate Arotake.

## Name

Arotake is a word in te reo Māori meaning “review” or “evaluate.” The name reflects the project’s focus on the evaluation of meteorological models.

## Author

Jan Kazil – jan.kazil.dev@gmail.com – [jankazil.com](https://jankazil.com)

## License

BSD 3-Clause

Commit message:

Add RTO/ISO region definition file RTO_ISO_regions.geojson to distribution
Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration

README.md, after:

# Arotake

**Arotake** is a Python toolkit for evaluating meteorological forecast models against observations. It currently offers a comparison of select NOAA HRRR contiguous United States surface forecast variables with NCEI ISD-Lite surface observations, stratified by U.S. Regional Transmission Organization (RTO) and Independent System Operator (ISO) regions.

## Installation (Linux / macOS)

```bash
wget -O environment.yml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jankazil/Arotake/main/environment.yml  
mamba env create -y -f environment.yml  
conda activate arotake
```

## Overview

The toolkit provides analysis scripts for working with NOAA ISD-Lite surface observations and NOAA HRRR contiguous United States surface forecasts, organized by U.S. Regional Transmission Organization (RTO) and Independent System Operator (ISO) regions:

- **Construct_ISDLite_data_netCDF_for_RTO_ISO_regions.py**  
  Downloads ISD-Lite station metadata, filters stations by location and data availability, assigns stations to RTO/ISO regions, generates a regional station map, downloads the observations (optionally in parallel), and saves region-specific NetCDF files with observations. This needs to be done only once for the given time range.

- **Analyze_HRRR_vs_ISDLite_time_series_by_RTO_ISO_region.py**  
  Loads region-specific ISD-Lite observation NetCDF files and HRRR forecast files, computes regional HRRR-only statistics and HRRR-vs-observation diagnostics, saves results as NetCDF time series, and generates plots of the statistics for each region.

The workflow is

1. Download HRRR contiguous United States surface forecast data, only once for a given time range
2. Download and construct RTO/ISO region ISD-Lite datasets, only once for a given time range
3. Calculate RTO/ISO region HRRR vs ISD-Lite Statistics Time Series

## Workflow

## 1. Download HRRR surface forecast data

- Download the HRRR surface forecast data for the contiguous United States, a given time period, forecast initialization time, and forecast lead time, and convert them to netCDF files with the [HRRR-data](https://github.com/jankazil/hrrr-data) toolkit:
    - Use the script    [DownloadHRRRSurfaceForecast.py](https://github.com/jankazil/hrrr-data/blob/main/scripts/DownloadHRRRSurfaceForecast.py) to download HRRR surface forecast files in GRIB format for a given time range from the Amazon S3 HRRR bucket, which also extracts select variables into netCDF files into a directory tree as follows:

        hrrr.<YYYYMMDD\>/conus/hrrr.t<II\>z.wrfsfcf<FF\>_select_vars.nc

## 2. Construct RTO/ISO region ISD-Lite datasets

**Call**

```bash
Construct_ISDLite_data_netCDF_for_RTO_ISO_regions.py <start_year> <start_month> <start_day> <end_year> <end_month> <end_day> <geojson_file> <isdlite_data_dir> [-n <n_jobs>]
```

(The definitions of the RTO/ISO regions in GEOJson format are provided with this distribution in the file data/RTO_ISO_regions.geojson, source: U.S. Energy Information Administration)Information Administration)

**Example**

```bash
Construct_ISDLite_data_netCDF_for_RTO_ISO_regions.py 2021 1 1 2021 12 31 data/RTO_ISO_regions.geojson data/ISD-LITE/ -n 8
```

**This will:**

- Load RTO/ISO region geometries.
- Download and filter ISD-Lite station metadata.  
- Assign stations to RTO/ISO regions and save station lists.  
- Download observations (parallelized if `-n` > 1).  
- Save region-specific NetCDF files with the observations.  
- Plot a map of the ISD stations in each region:  

![ISD stations reporting in 2021](docs/RTO_ISO_regions_2021_ISD_stations_map.png)

## 3. Calculate RTO/ISO region HRRR vs ISD-Lite Statistics Time Series

**Call**

```bash
Analyze_HRRR_vs_ISDLite_time_series_by_RTO_ISO_region.py <start_year> <start_month> <start_day> <end_year> <end_month> <end_day> <forecast_init_hour> <forecast_lead_hour> <geojson_file> <isdlite_data_dir> <hrrr_data_dir> <out_dir>
```

<hrrr_data_dir\> is the parent directory of a data directory tree which contains the HRRR netCDF files as follows (see Section 1):  

hrrr.<YYYYMMDD\>/conus/hrrr.t<II\>z.wrfsfcf<FF\>_select_vars.nc

(The definitions of the RTO/ISO regions in GEOJson format are provided with this distribution in the file data/RTO_ISO_regions.geojson, source: U.S. Energy Information Administration)

**Example**

```bash
Analyze_HRRR_vs_ISDLite_time_series_by_RTO_ISO_region.py 2021 1 1 2021 12 30 12 6 data/RTO_ISO_regions.geojson data/ISD-LITE/ data/HRRR/ results/
```

**This will:**

- Load RTO/ISO region geometries and ISD-Lite observations.
- Load HRRR forecasts for the specified initialization/lead hours.
- Compute and save time series of HRRR regional statistics and of HRRR vs ISD-Lite observation statistics.
- Generate plots of the time series per region, e.g.:

![HRRR vs ISD Lite 2 m temperature bias at stations reporting in 2021](docs/2021-01-01-2021-12-31.model_vs_obs_bias_at_obs_locs.png)

## Public API

### Modules

- **`arotake.interpolation`**  
  Function:
  - `model_2D_interpolate`: Interpolates a 2-D model field to arbitrary lat/lon points using bilinear regridding with xESMF, with internal caching to improve performance.

- **`arotake.rto_iso`**  
  Functions:
  - `regions`: Loads all RTO/ISO regions from a GeoJSON file and returns a `GeoDataFrame`.
  - `region`: Loads a single RTO/ISO region by name and returns a `GeoDataFrame`.

- **`arotake.statistics`**  
  Classes:
  - `Model2DRegionalStatisticsTimeSeries`: Computes and accumulates regional statistics (mean, std, var) of a model variable over a polygonal region, exports results as DataFrames or Datasets.
  - `ModelVsObs2DStatisticsTimeSeries`: Computes model-vs-obs metrics (bias, RMSE, correlation, coverage) by interpolating model data to station locations and comparing with observations.

- **`arotake.plotting`**  
  Functions:
  - `plot_df_timeseries`: Plots one figure per statistic by overlaying multiple DataFrames and saves PNG files with consistent naming conventions.

## Development

### Code Quality and Testing Commands

- `make fmt` – Runs `ruff format` to auto-format Python files.
- `make lint` – Runs `ruff check --fix` to lint and autofix style issues.
- `make check` – Runs both formatting and linting.
- `make type` – Runs `mypy` type checker in strict mode.
- `make test` – Runs `pytest` with coverage reporting.

### Notes

Arotake uses [xESMF](https://xesmf.readthedocs.io]) (Universal Regridder for Geospatial Data), which uses [ESMPy](https://earthsystemmodeling.org/esmpy) (ESMF Python Regridding Interface) as backend. These packages are as of writing available as conda packages from conda-forge. This necessitates installing a conda environment to operate Arotake.

## Name

Arotake is a word in te reo Māori meaning “review” or “evaluate.” The name reflects the project’s focus on the evaluation of meteorological models.

## Author

Jan Kazil – jan.kazil.dev@gmail.com – [jankazil.com](https://jankazil.com)

## License

BSD 3-Clause
